three two one boom here we go what's up
man
what hey did you trim your beard since
I've seen you last no I'm afraid like
you have no it might be a fraction
shorter but that's only because we're
falling out more it falls out oh yeah I
mean all the time you know it's computed
oh and so then you get these weird hairs
they have - so the beers the same length
have you gotten any younger since I've
seen you last
okay hard to say but that is your does
your business how many years has it been
since I saw you for 15 and you have not
you have not gotten younger have you
maintained I think yeah but not through
my own work so the work is still very
much ongoing though we have come a long
way in the past five years but you know
this is a complicated thing to fix yes
and we need to fix all of it in order to
really make people start getting
biologically younger so let's bring
people up to speed what what have the
what are the latest revelations what's
the the latest in terms of what we
understand in terms of what could
possibly be fixed about human aging all
right so the fantastic answer to that
question is there are no new revelations
in terms of what we understand our
understanding seems to have been pretty
much complete already like 20 years ago
the fact that we haven't found out any
fundamental new stuff that we didn't
know before then is fantastic news
because of course it means that we're
unlikely to find anything out in the
future either it means that we are
pretty much on top of the description of
the problem and therefore it's all about
solving the problem is it possible
summarize the problem what is the
problem what causes human agents sure
that's easy so aging is simply the same
thing in a living organism like you or
me as what it is in a car or an
aeroplane or any other simple man-made
machine it's a fact of physics nothing
to do with biology that any machine that
has moving parts is going to do itself
damage in the course of its normal
operation as an intrinsic consequence of
its norm
operation okay so in the same way the a
car Russ Jim is gonna bring that
microphone good yep yeah sorta keep it
about a fist from your face yeah so in
the same way that a car rusts or you
know accumulates junk in the oil or
whatever
similarly the human body does damage to
itself and again just like a car and
airplane the human body is set up to
tolerate a certain amount of that damage
so that we can get through to the point
where we have kids before we start going
functionally downhill when a mentally or
physically but after that evolution
doesn't care about us anymore and
therefore we are only equipped to
tolerate that much and eventually the
damage that's being done accumulates to
a point beyond what the body fed up to
tolerate and that's when things start to
go wrong and was about to function less
well what is the difference physically
between a young person an older person
in terms of their ability to recover
from the damage of just regular everyday
life and exercise and abuse and running
around yeah all that so that's just one
aspect of the difference between a
younger person and an older person so
let me answer that question by stepping
back one step okay so the difference
ultimately arises from what the body is
made of at the molecular level and
failure level the body accumulates
various changes that are chemical and
biological consequences of what the body
has to do to keep us alive from one day
to the next even starting before were
born and those changes so if I'm using
the word damage to describe those
changes because eventually things don't
work so well so you're quite right that
recovery from injury is one thing that
doesn't work so well but so are plenty
of other things so whether it's how fast
you can run how fast you can think you
know how strongly you can grip something
how fast you can walk you know all of
these things become progressively less
good but the point is that the amount by
which they become less good is pretty
negligible until the age of 40 or 50
it's only then that the decline starts
to accelerate so what do you do in your
own life to try to mitigate that
acceleration yeah I'm a really bad
example of this for tuning that's crazy
but you're this is your business so
there are two reasons why I'm bad okay
the first reason is that I'm really
well-built I'm just lucky I'm just one
of those hateful people who I can eat
and drink exactly what I like and
nothing seems to happen and I don't even
need to exercise to speak of and you
know I'm for biologically far younger
than I actually am chronologically how
old you chronologically chronologically
I'm 57 how old do you think you are
biologically well I'm told that I'm a
good decade less than that this is what
I get told every time I do these tests
which I've been doing for the past let
me see 18 years yeah so that's pretty
good news so you're lucky yeah yeah but
the other thing is you know I'm working
hard to hasten the defeat of Aging and
maybe it's a net win you know maybe the
amount that I'm hastening it is more
than the damage I'm doing myself by for
example not getting enough sleep and you
still drink booze I still drink how
often I drink probably more than the
average American what does that mean
three or four yeah three or four beers
every day a must and a whiskey or two
every day as well I'm left so six days a
week or six drinks a day Wow
one drink right now do any honey cancer
we have the fig I only drink actual bear
not Heineken was the actual beer well
you know IPAs things like that like bit
Heineken doesn't taste like beer of
course not I don't know I mean we didn't
fuse beer for a while but I think I've
never smoked pot I mean I've
experimented with it when I was younger
but it never did anything to me hello
let's get some ice get some ice some
whiskey
I don't put ice you're very specific
with your booze well no no that specific
when it comes to whiskey I mean Oh beer
for that matter I'm not a snob at all I
mean I was you know you don't drink
Heineken you gotta be a snob delicious
beer Heineken is refreshing which is you
know it's like when you call
research descriptive it's a euphemism
for not worth much I understand
refreshing meaning it's a cold beverage
but it's not it doesn't have the stout
taste that you enjoy it has the function
of water right or lemonade or something
along those lines
yeah how found upon it is in the
anti-aging community to be a person who
drinks as much as you do everyone in the
aging community knows me and they know
that I don't drink to excess for myself
right they know that what I drink is you
know what works for me look at Violetta
it's pronounced Hey look a feeling
fucked it up Jane do you prefer this
it's very have you ever Buffalo Trace
that's okay okay like everything's
better okay my PR people will will will
get pissed off with me fit this yeah in
the anti-aging community I am NOT
frowned upon at all I don't know that I
do what I do but everyone said you know
there will be donors out there who will
frown on you for that but it's your own
fault that's all that tastes like smoke
yeah that's right it's one of those um
is it smoky smoky peaty whisky it's
really nice it's very smoky yeah
interesting only popular restaurants I
know that's I that's why I know they're
selling it yeah I prefer the Buffalo
Trace it's weird though it tastes like
go like it's made with smoke like some
house right you say is it PD is it well
that's the word love lies yeah that's
the one nothing is um
how bad is drinking four well of course
it depends whether you drink too much
and different too much is a different
amount for different people
yeah so you know if you took within your
limits you know if you drink enough that
you got a hangover in the morning you
know once a week then you're definitely
drinking too much last time I had a
hangover
to be when I was a teenager oh okay you
just keep it going and drink lots of
water
I don't actually think all that much
water really god you're defying all the
rules that's confusing are you still
rolling for exercise last time we spoke
you were you don't remember enough so so
when I used to live in Cambridge yes I
used to be quite an expert at punting
punting which is this thing that you're
doing Oxford with a stick that's right
I'm sorry that you push against the
bottom of the river with no it sounds
when you describe it like that like a
really clunky you know activity but
actually it's fantastically smooth and
when you go to it's really easy doesn't
it's not even tiring and it's
ridiculously romantic romantic yes yes
and it's definitely a babe magnet ooh
there you go and good exercise yeah yeah
yeah good for balance and this is that
basically what you do for exercise are
do not do that live in Cambridge anymore
California now oh you do you live out
here yeah I live in the Bay Area get uh
what are you doing out there well that's
where the foundation is back oh okay
yeah I've been over here for ten years
now so what is a day-to-day life what's
a normal day for Arbor Day
well there isn't really a normal day I
spend a ridiculous amount of time on the
road because I've you know being a
high-profile member of this community I
view the outreach side of things just
educating people on this as an enormous
ly valuable and important part of my
work and also it's something you can't
delegate because you know conference
organizers or interviews for that matter
they always want the frontman wears on
the science side we've been able to hire
extremely good people and so I've been
able to delegate that to a very large
extent now in terms of progress like
what what has to happen for there to be
a shift in the the biological age of
people where you could actually reverse
it or we could actually maintain the
position they're at now for extended
periods of time first of all let me onto
that last part
so reversing aging is actually going to
be pretty much the result of maintaining
it there won't be a just even tiny
because that would mean that you are
airing the damage of aging just exactly
at the same speed that the damage is
being laid down which is ridiculous you
know you know this if you can do that
you can obviously do it a little bit
faster than it's being laid down so you
don't really need to think about the
maintaining part however what we need is
we need to be able to repair all of the
types of damage and because the human
body is so very complicated there are of
course a lot of different types of
damage so it's a divide and conquer
strategy any of these types of damage at
the molecular level cellular level can
perfectly well kill you more or less on
schedule however well we fix all the
others so since the beginning sense
research foundation my organization has
focused on the most challenging the most
difficult types of damage because
basically the easiest ones are being
worked on by other people we have you
see we set ourselves up as an
independent charity we so we're charity
we're a public 501c3 which means that if
someone gives us money they get a tax
break but we're independent which means
that we do not rely on peer-reviewed
government grants or anything like that
we just rely on for that philanthropy
the numbers advantage of that is that
we're not competing with a lot of other
people who have their own ideas about
what to do and in particular the people
who are deciding who wins that
competition or not you know in when you
prefer government grants it's terrible
you know you end up having to basically
emphasize really boring low-hanging
fruit just in order to have a chance at
getting funded because people want to
avoid funding things that don't lead to
high-profile publications soon so you
know really ambitious high-risk
high-reward stuff just doesn't get done
and so that so we focused on that
because other people can't that make
sense and that's very unfortunate that
that doesn't get done outside of what
you're trying yeah I mean of course this
is a recognized problem yeah and then I
H for example have tried to address it
with Awards with types of grants that
are specifically focused on more
cutting-edge visionary stuff but the
magnitude there is time it's real
tokenism you know it left the 1% of the
NIH budget what's frustrating to you
about the the state of understanding
pair and understanding the the ability
to fix things well I'm not the kind of
guy who gets frustrated very much you
know I'm always a glass half-full kind
of person so for me what matters the
most is the fact that the understanding
that this is what aging is and this is
hard to deal with it has improved so
much over the years
so I started pulling out the idea of
that this was the way to go after ageing
20 years ago before up until then the
only game in town really was we've got
to make the body run more cleanly and
generate this damage more slowly than it
naturally does and that's a very big
conceptual difference right so it's not
surprising that it took me maybe 10
years to really get the damage repair
approach taken properly seriously by my
colleagues in the scientific community
but about 10 years ago it was taken
seriously and in fact over the past
decade people have been periodically
reinventing the idea and you know I
don't necessarily always get as much of
the credit as I probably ought to have
but I don't care about that the main
thing is I don't have to persuade anyone
anymore
people get it that damage repair is at
least if not the way to go at least a
very promising way to go so really what
happens next is convincing people
outside of the community right and
there's been enormous progress as well
so when you and I spoke last five years
ago really that was the end of the story
I pretty much won the scientific
argument but still no one was really
listening and then over the past five
years the huge thing that's happened is
the private sector interests in this has
taken off so investors have been coming
along
typically it's been led by the angel
investor types their seed investors
people who are willing to do really
high-risk high-reward stuff but they
understand that we're getting close
enough that this is the next big thing
that we will actually have bona fide a
genuine rejuvenation medicine in the
foreseeable future how far seeable Wow
you know some of its already in clinical
trials like what kind of stuff so for
example the stem cell therapy is now
being used for aspects of Aging with a
really clear understanding of how
they're going to work Parkinson's
disease is a great example of this well
so therapy is the right way to go
between clinical trials something that's
been in the news a lot over the past
couple of years it's in lytx which are
drugs that selectively kill what are
called senescence cells so these are
cells that hang out in the body in a bad
state where they're doing more harm good
then not only are they not doing what
they're supposed to they're also
secreting nasty stuff that damages their
neighborhood and so drugs have been
developed that seemingly pretty good at
getting rid of those so they're in
clinical trials as well listen and so we
don't work we used to work on that area
we basically do no work on that area
anymore hardly any and we may end up
doing that or a couple years from now
just because other people are doing it
and so our money is better spent doing
the stuff that's still at an earlier
stage and beyond that you know we are
able even for things that are a couple
of years behind that so it won't be in
clinical trials for another year or two
we've been able even then to get
investors interested so that we can
actually spin the projects out and start
up companies and focus on the things
that remain it's not just us of course
there's lots and lots of I mean
literally way over 100 other companies
now that I work with because they're not
spin-out from my foundation but they are
you know doing closely aligned work and
so I'm I'm literally spending probably a
day a week on average just making
introductions between you know in
entrepreneur founders scientific
founders of with with great science and
investors who want to get involved the
stem cell therapies fascinate to me
because I've had some personal
experience with it I've had some
injuries that I cured with well doctors
cured with stem cells in a remarkable
way we're at the point where I I was
told that I need shoulder surgery and I
had a large rotator cuff tear and it's
gone I know it's incredible it's amazing
but that's not really what I'm talking
about that's gone really well you try
and run a neurodegenerative diseases so
well the big difference it's not just
fairly brain versus anything else what
I'm saying is that what you got was
using stem cells to treat an acute
injury right a tear and that's what stem
cell therapies have been developed the
most for so far
and I've shown the most promise for but
now we're getting to the point where
we're in a position to use themselves to
address certain aspects of aging in
other words certain aspects of slow
steady progressive decline that happens
throughout life through intravenous use
well not necessarily intravenous so let
me talk about the Parkinson's disease
case in a bit more detail so what
Parkinson's disease is driven by is the
loss of a particular type of neuron so
of course in the brain there's lots of
different types of neuron that's one
type called a dopaminergic neuron and
they exist just in one specific very
small part of the brain core the
substantia nigra so it turns out those
neurons they well because they do a lot
of work basically and they die at a much
more rapid rate than other types of
neuron so we end up all of this with
maybe a quarter of those neurons that we
had when we were young adults having
gone by old age that's okay that with
that amount of margin of error is
tolerable in the system it just doesn't
doesn't have a consequence but of course
as with everything in aging some people
have the problem accumulate faster than
others and so some people by old age
will have lost maybe three-quarters of
the dopaminergic neurons and that is
what gives you Parkinson's disease so
what is stem-cell therapy if you think
about it what it is basically you put
cells into the body that have been
programmed have been gotten to have been
developed into the right state in the
lab so that they know what to do when
you inject them they know like to divide
and to then transform themselves to
differentiate into the right kind of
other cell so what has been developed is
dopaminergic precursor cells stem cells
that know how to become dopaminergic
neurons and those are injected into this
one place a substantial Niagra and they
do what they do that thing so they're
injected right into the brain that's
right Wow so actually this was first
tried more than 25 years ago there was a
clinical trial Sweden because people
knew what bugs what what was the this
was driving Parkinson's disease so they
knew this ought to work but of course
back then we knew almost nothing about
how to manipulate stem cells in
poetry so what they did was these people
they took cells from the right part of
the brain of aborted fetuses right and
they just injected them now this was
enormously speculative because you know
first of all the brain of an aborted
fetus is very poor very has hardly
developed at all right and so just
taking the right cells from kind of the
right place with hit and miss and sure
enough almost all the time
there was no effect because you know
they just didn't get the right kind of
stem cell but occasionally it worked
occasionally patients got lucky and got
some of the right kind of stamps how
often well I think there was a single
digit number in the clinical trial that
was done like maybe three or four but
the question was how good was the effect
when there was any effect at all and the
answer was astronomical so a couple
years ago there was actually a
retrospective written by the group that
did this clinical trial and it was
written specifically about the first
respondent the first person who really
got lucky and responded well and it was
written on the on the occasion of the
25th anniversary of that person being
treated what happened with that person
was they were treated once just got one
injection and the pocke symptoms went
away so well that the person was taken
off their prime medication there's the
standard medication for Parkinson's
called l-dopa which is a precursor
molecule for dopamine they would just
take nothing
again no symptoms symptoms gradually
started coming back after 15 years 15
years and no symptoms retorted from one
injection Wow that's about as good as
you can get so of course now that we
know so much about how to manipulate
stem cells before we inject them and
therefore how to inject the right kind
of stem cell you know people are very
optimistic and that's why there are
clinical trials already ongoing right
now
that's fascinating so what's really
interesting to me is that during the
time this what person had this one
injection the rate of progress the the
amount of understanding of how to
manipulate these cells and make them
exactly what you want has increased well
that's right I probably shall still
increasing considerably that's right and
so what I was saying about we House
Research Foundation is moving
increasingly away from bothering
welcomes on sino lytx because other
people are doing it that was already
true when we started the fan
in respective themself we didn't need to
everyone else although all the important
work with already being done by other
people so where are they out right now
we're here where you out in terms of
like let's just focus on Parkinson's
disease game so the clinical trials are
in phase one early stage so we won't
know anything really good for another
year maybe but maybe two years but you
know we it's not it's not just one trial
there's there's several groups around
the world that are focused on this some
of them I haven't started the trial yeah
but they're about to and so on so you
know it will of that that gives you a
sense of the level of optimism of the
specialist in this area that's very
exciting
so you when you look at your future at
57 years old and you think of yourself
at seventy-seven do you think you're
gonna be the same well um if you had a
guess so in order to answer that I have
to come back to what I said about this
being a divide and conquer problem and
the fact that we need to fix all of
these things in order to really give the
the proper result in terms of biological
age now that means that any speculation
that I may make about the timeframe for
when we get there in a speculation about
the most difficult parts of the problem
and therefore it's highly speculative
because the most difficult parts are at
the earliest stage and therefore there's
more opportunity for things to go wrong
between now and that and so to speak so
when I asked to give a timeframe
estimate on this I always make sure to
emphasize that it's probabilistic that
what I'm giving you is a time frame for
when I think we have a 50/50 chance of
getting a decisive level of
comprehensiveness of these therapies and
at the moment that number is 17 years
now that's very specific well yeah and
it's yeah I mean but the thing is what
matters is how that number has changed
over the time over time so I first
started giving timeframe predictions
about 1516 years ago and back then I
said 25 years right so it's only come
down by eight years in 16 years we
sounds like bad news right but here are
two pieces of good news first piece of
good news is that it hardly came down at
all for the first than right
yes it was like I would say yeah um five
years ago I was still saying 22 21 years
so it's been it hasn't been hasn't been
slippin any further for a little while
and the reason why I think of speeded up
to parity is because the only thing that
we're slowing it down before was lack of
funding beforehand you know I was always
saying this is how fast the science
allows the problem to be solved but the
science only allows the problem to be
solved if the fans can be done and that
require ultimately biomedical research
is inherently expensive and we are just
not able to pull in as much money as we
need for this so it's interesting
because it seems like that would be
something that most people would have a
vested interest in fund you don't say
and sure over the past five years as I
mentioned as things have become
investable things are changed a lot
every time we end up being able to spin
a project out from a lab into a private
company another digit gets put on its
budget like overnight just because it's
so much easier to get people to write a
check if they think was a chance even a
really small chance that they'll get
their money back in spades sometime
later you know I guess that's what you
would expect but yeah I mean of course
the other thing that we always are up
against is the mindset that people have
got into about aging that they've needed
to get into for all these millennia that
we have been unable to do anything about
it all have any prospect of doing
anything about it anytime soon you know
what are you going to do you've got this
terrible ghastly thing that's going to
happen to you in the distant future and
um you can't do anything about it so
you've got to put it out of your minds
you're not going to spend you don't want
to spend your life being preoccupied by
it so you've got to find somewhere to
like not think about it and get on with
your miserably short life and make the
best of it right and of course the work
the only way one can do that is by
somehow denying somehow tricking oneself
into denying that this is such a big
deal you know and thereby pretending for
example that it's not really like a
medic
problem at all you know and it's like
inevitable and universal and natural or
alternatively saying well okay maybe we
could fix it if we want to but it would
be a bad thing that aiding is some kind
of blessing in disguise that's where all
the heat yeah and that's where all this
stuff comes from about oh dear well we
put all the people or how we pay the
pensions or weren't dictators there
forever or will it be boring you know
which I have to spend my whole life
contending with how do you say well hey
get over the dictators living for
everyone well you know last time I
looked dictator was fairly high on the
league table of risky jobs you know of
Aging in the furthermore the ones that
do die of Aging they tend to have
organized their succession in advance
anyway so it's as if they were already
immortal so I mean come on
not only the percentage of dictators
versus the percentage of regular people
is so incredibly small to not cure aging
because of dictator seems like the
dumbest idea ever well there you go I
mean but people really you know yes this
is what people do right that will come
up with some reason why aging is a
blessing in disguise and then they will
instantly switch off their brains for
fear of actually coming up with a
refutation of that reason or even yeah
you know because romantic aspects of
Aging and the weird ones right yeah you
know the inevitable like it though it's
fine it's wonderful I'm looking forward
to it it's it's essentially a disease
that we all get yeah I mean I have to be
very careful with the word disease some
people aren't so you've heard David
Sinclair oh yes he's been a great friend
of mine for a lot of years and we've
yeah we have a very similar attitude to
you know authority we don't think much
of it and so we tend to push the
boundaries a bit both of us you know in
different ways
so he actually his view of calling aging
a disease is a bit different from mine
he's more comfortable with it I tend to
feel that the probe there's a problem
with calling aging a disease which is
that it makes it sound like it's
something that could be cured with
one-off therapy like like you know an
infection which is which it isn't it's a
side effect of being alive and as such
it's something that you know you can
repair you can stave off but you have to
do it periodically because the damage is
going to continue to be created and
the reason why that's important is that
it determines what kind of what kind of
medicine we look for a lot of
Alzheimer's research for example in fact
I would say most of Alzheimer's research
has been predicated on this kind of
mistake on the idea that if we can just
cure Outsiders they know so I would say
that actually it's not that the word
disease is used to narrowly and should
be broadened to include aging rather
it's the other way around that the word
disease is used too broadly and should
be narrowed so it's not to include
things like Alzheimer's that are
actually parts of Aging because really
the difference between the progressive
chronic conditions like Alzheimer's that
we call diseases and the ones that we
don't like you know loss of muscle or
declining the immune system or whatever
you know the only difference is
semantics some of them you know there
are both parts of ating just some of
them are ones that we've chosen to give
to thieves like names - what would you
call aging if you don't call it disease
well I call it a medical problem all
right okay that's pretty pure yeah yeah
in terms of potential future treatments
stem cells seem to be very promising
there are there other competing
treatments that you think are equally
promising or yes sure but they're not
competing so um so as I said because
this is a divide-and-conquer problem
with a bunch of different types of
damage all of which we need to fix then
we need to look at the war fixes are
available for each individual type so
what stem cells are there to fix is so
loss where cells are dying and they're
not being automatically replaced in the
body by cell division have you
personally experienced any stem cell
therapy no I haven't done any therapy
for any of any kind yet but of course
you know I'm paying attention yeah I'll
see you know of course the way the
nature of Aging is that because it's
progressive and because it's only it
only causes functional decline after a
certain point there's a trade-off that
one always has to keep in mind in terms
of timing of a therapy between how badly
one needs it and
rapidly the quality of the therapy is
improving so you know if I take a
stem-cell therapy now then there's a
chance that'll be bad for me for
whatever reason okay
whereas ten years down the road I will
still I would have needed it for those
ten years today is that the right I may
start to knead it a bit more but they
will it will have benefited from ten
years more of research and refinement so
you're a cautious paycheck oh sure I
mean I don't think anybody wants to be
the first patient I'm in I'll tell you
I'll be the first guy I'm already doing
a bunch of stem cell therapies will do
intravenous stem cell therapies - well
sure but I mean the point is you you
weren't the first to do any of these
I'll for sure right yeah so yes in terms
of other things so synthetics do not
compete with stem cells because in
oolitic for that to do a different thing
to reflects a different type of damage
namely the accumulation of these bad
cells right and then you've got to have
you know cancer therapies you've got to
have therapies that remove molecular
waste products through inside self a
couple of our startup companies have
have doing that you've got a remove
waste products from outside the cells
for example so people of use the immune
system to do that you've got a repair
DNA in in the mitochondria these special
parts of the cell that do the chemistry
of breathing you know there's a bunch of
different things we have to do and
another piece of good news I told you
earlier on that there's been no real
change over the past 20 years and our
understanding of what the problem is
better than that they'll also been no
real need to change our preferred
approaches to each of to each of the
damage repair technologies we haven't
had we haven't you know found bad news
that said oh dear this potential
approach to fixing this particular type
of damage isn't going to work for this
new reason that we didn't know before
therefore we have to start again and
think of a new one that hasn't happened
to either
that's excellent so it's just
essentially refining the procedures
while actually implementing them yes is
this is this something you still truly
enjoy doing I wouldn't say I ever enjoy
doing it yeah really I mean I enjoy life
I enjoy just you know staring at the sky
from my hot tub and it's just that I
want to carry on doing it rather
you know doing instead so almost
investment it's an investment it's also
I mean it's obviously some sort of an
intellectual pursuit epithet I mean some
people view is an intellectual patina I
don't I I really feel you know I've ever
ever since there was a young kid I have
wanted to spend my life making a
difference to the world improving the
quality and of course in this case
quantity of life of humanity and I've
got just one of those incredibly lucky
people I've been able to end up in this
position of essentially leading the
crusade to do that in the biggest
possible way so this is something that
you felt compelled to do from a really
early age not the specific thing so what
actually happened was that as a teenager
having pretty much decided that this is
what I wanted to do with my life the
first thing I did was I got into
artificial intelligence research and the
reason that happened was because when I
was a teenager I tried my hand at
programming I find that was pretty damn
good at it and I thought well ok I'm one
of the big problems in the world is the
problem of work the fact that people
have to spend so much of their time
doing stuff that they would not do
unless they were being paid for it and
therefore we need more automation so I
work on that because I'm good at it and
I had no reason at that time to believe
that I was gonna be any good at biology
specifically particularly and there were
other people who were particularly good
at biology and I had made the mistake
ins but absolute assumption that
everybody realized that aging was by far
the world's biggest problem and
therefore biologists would be working on
it in grudging away and of course he
didn't hear much but hey it's a really
hard problem so that's not surprise
so it was until my late twenties that I
found out that I was wrong what happened
was that I met and married a biologist
quite anyone actually who was a full
professor at that time at UC San Diego
she was in England on sabbatical and
through her I not only learnt a lot of
biology just by accident you know over
the dinner table but I also found out
gradually that she wasn't interested in
aging I just kind of it hadn't occurred
to me so it didn't come up in
conversation I began to notice that it
wasn't coming up in conversation started
asking questions and she would say
things like you know well I mean like
it's just decay isn't it and I would say
well yeah but so what
and she
well I mean you're not gonna learn any
fundamental truths about the universe
from studying decay and I would say well
that's true yes but but but it's bad for
you and she would say but that's not my
problem
and I would say well it kind of is and
that would be about as far as we would
ever get so eventually I came to terms
with it because it wasn't just her of
course it was all the other biology if I
was meeting as a strange closed
mindedness well you know as I say people
have had to find ways not to think about
it yes and so eventually I thought well
that's just someone do I know I'd say I
better switch fields and I happened to
have inveigled myself into a position
where switching fields was something I
was able to do I had a very undemanding
job at the University of Cambridge doing
bioinformatics which allowed me to do my
artificial intelligence research in my
spare time I was being paid well enough
and you know I had access to university
facilities and all that so all I needed
to do was repurpose my spare time and
you know start paying my way to go to
conferences could of course back then
nobody knew me and I wasn't being
invited and and so I and it went pretty
well
I started doing quite well-received
stuff and so I became quite well
respected in the field very quickly and
for the first five years that was all
that was happening because I was
basically harmless and it was then five
years in in the year 2000 that I had
this kind of Eureka moment that damage
repair with the way to go and started
talking about what the impact could be
and people start to think I had gone
completely crazy and it took a little
while for people to come around so when
you say that at an early age you felt
compelled to try to help people like
whoa what was that
so what actually happened with this it
was all down to my mother's desire for
me to practice the piano you know she
wasn't a particularly good pianist
herself but she wanted me to learn how
to black how about the other and sure
she was she put pressure on me to
practice all the time and I was
resistant but somehow or other my mother
had already instilled in me a sense of
introspection you know a desire to
understand why I thought what I thought
so I actually decided to think about why
I didn't want to play the piano and it
took very little time for me to realize
that the fundamental reason I didn't
want to spend so much time tapping away
on this thing was that the best case an
outcome of this would be that I would
become a good pianist and that was just
not good enough you know we're already
lots of other good pianist so I would
not be you know contributing
significantly to the quality of life of
mankind by becoming just another one an
additional subpoena that's right yeah
and so I thought well I want to be could
have but and of course it was gradual
after that probably eight or nine so
over the next few years I'm gonna say
this general idea that I playing the
piano was a waste of time crystallized
into the understanding you know I could
actually articulate that I wanted to
make a difference to the world and so
that's how I you know by the time I was
fifteen when I thought I programming and
I've just told you the rest that's an
interesting mapping out of your future
you know at nine years old recognizing
you're not going to make a significant
contribution to the world by doing
something that other people have already
done yeah that's right that's a really
interesting way to look at the world
we're nine I have a nine-year-old
daughter I can't imagine her thinking
like that I think when I started um
working actually at this bioinformatics
project that I mentioned I came I had a
lot of exposure to a lot of top-flight
biologists and it turns out that there
were fields that were just fashionable
right and but yeah and lots of top
biologists would be competing for
Sepphoris lee with each other to make
the next advance in one particularly
narrow narrow area that was just really
fashionable and other areas would be
just completely neglected I thought is
going on here why are these smart people
choosing to do something that minimizes
the likelihood that they will have any
impact in other words basically whatever
they whatever they find out they didn't
matter they themselves didn't matter at
all because they could have been hit by
a truck or done something a bit
then someone else would have found out
the exact same thing 10 minutes later so
they were making no difference I never
understood I feel that I understand it
so you've always felt compelled to make
a difference is there something your
mother instilled in you is it something
you just had yeah I don't really think
my mother instilled in me I think the
introspection was and I if you ask me
how she did that I had no idea but but
yeah somehow or other no I don't like
that but no I think we wanting to make a
difference you just intrinsic in me and
it's something that I just realized as a
result of the introspection mmm when you
look back at that now that's got to be
an interesting course where you've
recognized at a very young age that you
wanted to make some sort of a difference
but that knowing that you would have
that epiphany at a young age when it
comes to like being a pianist or doing
something that's going to significantly
impact people that is not a standard
path that many people are gone that's a
it's a very interesting way to set up
your life well I wouldn't say I set my
life up I say I once I had intentions
but if we look at how I got from there
to here enormous enormous amount of it
was just sheer luck mmm right I mean you
know if most people's lives right
exactly so I would say you know I had a
hope I had a you know general you know
aspiration but you know I would say that
I'm just incredibly privileged to have
you know being able to reach the
pinnacle of my chosen field of endeavor
you know hardly anyone can say that yes
no that is you you you're also well you
fit the part - you're a weirdo you know
I mean you know you're a weirdo suddenly
you know I say that with all due respect
cause in a compliment as well of course
it definitely yeah it's definitely
difficult to make a difference to the
world if you are following the rules and
so on I'm always instinctively looking
for ways to do things
things that other people might have
overlooked I mean even trivial things is
there anything that frustrates you about
this pursuit I'm not an easily
frustrated kind of guy I mean of course
sometimes it gets to me how slow how
slowly things are going how resistant
people are how irrational the resistance
is but even there you know I've you know
I've already from some of the things
I've already said you understand that
I'm I'm I'm really sympathetic to
humanity in this regard I understand
that most people just you know the
psychological burden of the positive the
prospect of physiological decline is so
enormous that they've got no choice
they've got to put it out of their mind
yes and you know some people feel why
don't I psychologically stronger or
whatever and they can bite the bullet
and actually work on this even though
it's a very very long haul but some
people aren't and that doesn't mean that
they are know that I left a serving of
the benefits it's a very strange thing
where people put on intellectual
blinders and they're talking about aging
and dying it is very weird if you had
heated discussions with other
intellectuals about this because I would
imagine over time over time yeah yeah I
mean the whole thing came to me first
when I was a Cambridge actually and as
an undergrad this was some time before
of course so when I was in my first year
probably 1982 they brought in a stage
hypnotist to do a show you ever seen a
safe position yes okay so this guy you
know he's got an audience of a few
hundred people all of us you know can be
undergraduates and so the first step is
you know do some stuff that gets some
particularly amenable people into a
light trance and he brings a few of them
up on stage and starts to go further
right so there was this one particular
part of the show that stuck in my mind
what happened was this one guy was
brought up and got into a but really
really cheap trance and then the next
step was that the hypnotist says okay
this is actually your right elbow and
this is your left elbow so you switch
the guy's elbows right no elaboration of
the continent the implications of this
just
getting the button to completely
completely implicitly believe this thing
right and then he said right I would
like you please to touch your right
elbow with your left forefinger right
and so of course it was all this reeling
and writhing and so on you know couldn't
do it and that was funny in and of
itself but that wasn't the coup de
Grasse what happened next was the key
thing the hypnotist says ok can stop now
and the guy stops and ellipsis and says
he couldn't do it good you and the guy
says now and then let me just says why
not that's the guy to explain why I
couldn't do it and here is the coup de
Grasse because what happens is the guy
gives a completely unhesitating lucid
grammatically correct explanation for
why couldn't do it and the explanation
of course will have a hole in it the
size of Canada but the fact is that I
won't see it he'll just be staying
sitting there with a straight face just
doing this and his friends all right the
user came to undergraduate right high IQ
highly respected each other's intellect
bro for one for their own intellect and
rationality and and they're rolling in
the aisles and the guys is unaffected so
when I started to have these discussions
with people about aging I'm sorry to
find out that people make these
unbelievable arguments in favor of it um
you know I click on this rail I call it
the pro aging trance and it was based on
that experience from my youth yeah I've
always said to people if there was a
pill that you can take that would stop
all aging all deterioration and all
diseases you'd be a fool not to take it
you'd be a fool do you want to suffer
the idea that this romantic look if it
was a rare thing that people aged a very
rare thing we would look at it with
great sadness that someone was afflicted
with this aging we saw someone hunched
over with severe arthritis and
osteoporosis and deterioration of the
joints and decaying of the cognitive
function and they don't know where they
are who they are we'd be so sad
but instead we think of it as like well
he's 90 he had a good life
that's exactly right it's not just the
fact that everyone gets it it's the fact
that everyone gets it I'm more or less
the same a chronological age you know so
it's considered to be this leveler and
Jeff yes absolutely people do a little
bit better you know 20 percent better
than average they were people that were
already you know happy is there any
concern or any thought whatsoever to the
idea of exacerbating overpopulation of
course this is a legitimate question the
thing that's frustrating to me is that
I've been answering it for 20 years
people kill dummies right well of course
a large part of the reason why it's
difficult to get their real answers
across is because so much fiction has
fiction has been written and across
movies giving wrong answers and you know
making a dramatic element out of it yeah
whether it's Blade Runner or in time or
you know any of these movies they all
make it as if in fact they kind of
reinforce the Probation trance right
they make it as if life would be even
worse if we had no aging okay so what's
the real answer the real answer is very
straightforward it's simply that other
technologies that are coming along
already and will be established
well-established and ubiquitous before
we get this to happen are going to solve
the problem because they will increase
the carrying capacity of the planets
remember that the reason why we have too
many people today and we've got
environmental consequences is not
because of lack of space it's because of
the amount of pollution that the average
person generates specifically of course
how biggest thing being pumping carbon
into the atmosphere but of course you
know whether it's plastics or whatever
and we're fixing that you know we've got
solar energy and wind energy now that
are completely exploding and they're
going to completely replace fossil fuels
and we got there without people even
having to wake up and realize that
climate change is actually quite an
urgent problem we got there simply
because the technology got to be good
enough that the production of a killer
of of energy is actually cheaper with
the renewable energy mech mechanisms
than it is from fossil fuel of course
not just that it's also agriculture so
artificial meat you know within not very
long it's gonna be both tastier and far
cheaper than regular meat and the amount
of space we're gonna save not let alone
the amount of methane that we're not
going to be generating it's going to you
know I haven't heard anything saying
it's gonna be tastier a view of Cordoba
tasty how so well we know how would it
be popular if it were not tastier
tastier
I don't think it necessary would have to
be tastier especially would be good but
tastier would be better
jackass you know this cheap desalination
the you know plastic eating bacteria all
these things are coming and so there is
no way that one can make a realistic
plausible argument that denies that the
carrying capacity of the planet will
rise far faster than the population even
to a certain extent we don't even need
to take into account other things like
the fact that fertility rates are coming
down everywhere and that once you can
live a very long time they're probably
going to come down even further because
people who are now choosing to delay
having their kids by five years will be
able to delay having them by fifty years
right Jesus do you have the same
optimistic perception about the ocean
well first of all let me say well I
think about the word optimism because I
know that you're not doing this but a
lot of people when they talk to me and
call me an optimist
they actually means running over
optimist and when they call themselves a
realist they mean that they're a
pessimist
so but but anyway about the ocean of
course I mean what's the difference you
know there's certainly there's a lot to
do one big problem right now of course
is the ocean is storing a lot of carbon
and releasing a lot as its warming up so
we definitely had to fix that as well
but it's part of the same problem you
know the less carbon there is in the
atmosphere the less the less of a
problem that is direct carbon removal
from the atmosphere in
technology that absolutely you know
burgeoning now and direct carbon capture
from the ocean seems to be something
that they could be plausible that
obviously different I'm I'm optimistic
in terms of the ability to clean up the
ocean I've had boy onslaught on a couple
times aware of him dude his devices that
he's created to remove plastics and
other garbage from the ocean
my concern is wild fish that the
depletion of the fish populations is an
unprecedented rate and it seems to be
we're somewhere in the neighborhood of
50 years away from a catastrophic
complete collapse of wild fisheries well
right and of course this is again a
problem that can be fixed by technology
you know if you can make artificial red
meat why not make artificial fish well
that wouldn't sir
that would be good that we can have
artificial fish but that wouldn't
necessarily make that population rebound
we would have to make large steps to try
to bring back the the equilibrium of the
ocean that's not clear I mean it's not
clear it's not clear no I mean most of
it I understand anyway this is not an
area I'm expert on of course so I may be
wrong but most of the surveyor
depletions
of populations of specific fish fish
species because of fishing fishing so if
we're not doing the overfishing we're
making the same fish elsewhere on land
mm-hmm well I'm sure a lot of it is
being done by the United States but I'm
sure and Great Britain and a lot of
first world countries but I'm sure a lot
of it is also being done by countries
that can't afford to make this
artificial fish or don't have the access
to it or at least in the time period
that it's going to take before these
fisheries rebound it's it when I talk to
people that have an understanding of
wildlife in the ocean they say it's a
desperate time and it's a desperate time
that is not really being recognized by
the general population because they can
still get sushi they can still get a
little bit at the local market but that
if you talk to the fishermen if you talk
to the wildlife biologists that are
really studying the levels they're like
this is nearing a point of no return
yeah III wouldn't dispute that I think
it's urgent
but all that really says is we should be
investing more in the development of
these new technologies that will hasten
the ability to and if they won't even
bother with wild fish if they mean if
they can make artificial meat I wonder
if the people really get into artificial
fish as well dr. Ewen oh I guess so but
some of them are not gonna make the cut
like no one's getting artificial tilapia
why not it's not that good well yet so
they've looked at it why didn't even
call it tilapia then but like to cook
people like the night like yes I'm
really optimistic about artificial meat
I mean it seems that they're I mean at
one point time was like a
quarter-million dollars for a hamburger
and now they've got it down to a point
where you can actually make an animal
meat product that does not come from an
animal dying that's right they're very
close to be able to make this in a mass
marketed way that's right that's
interesting
I'm excited about that I think that's
very interesting and I'm excited about
what you're saying that I think people
think about overpopulation one things
that you should take into consideration
is that as populations increase in
places urbanized the actual birth rate
goes down to the point where places like
Japan there's actually concern that
they're not having enough children right
and of course it is driven by prosperity
yeah a male education and emancipation
countries in the world the largest dozen
countries in the world the only one that
has really high 48 still in Nigeria you
know if you exclude sub-saharan Africa
it's basically completely solved a
problem really Nigeria is the only one
yeah if you look at the country you
would not expect like Bangladesh or
Pakistan or India you know their photo
here right it's down below three now
really yeah that's interesting so their
population will level out over the next
few decades
well yeah it's still declining yeah it's
plummeting you know people often used to
say that the only reason why China's
fertility rate is low is because of the
one-child policy which of course they
haven't
continued with ophlie because of
problems like this basically I mean
other countries were a little bit behind
the one-child policy did certainly
accelerate the process but if you look
at Brazil or into need here or any of
the countries of your fake factory the
same phenomenon plummeting have you
thought about what the future looks like
when people live to be four or five
hundred years old like how first of all
how wise will people be that's actually
interesting because so ok so here's
here's a really important thing that I
want to get across when we think about
longevity well actually three things are
worth saying
first of all longevity is a side effect
of health right right so you know huge
amount of the so-called debate that goes
on about the desirability of all of this
just goes away when you remember that
people actually quite like being healthy
but in terms of how the world will be
which is the question you asked there's
two questions here one question is how
will well actually be and the second
question is how well people in the niche
and expect the world to be and the
reason why those two questions are are
important to distinguish is because the
question of how the world will actually
be is very obviously completely
unanswerable even if we look 50th in the
future I mean if you look 50 years ago
right how much of what we have today
would have been predicted right yeah it
was completely different and certainly
in terms of longevity you know we're
only gonna be getting older at one year
per year it won't actually be any 500
year old people for another 400 years
I'll realize well yeah I mean the past
change the rate of the passage of time
it's my point right I understand we're
saying right but expectation is a
completely different thing and here's
why that matters there's going to become
a point there's gonna come a point where
people in general the general man in the
street starts to realize that they're
probably going to live an awfully long
time because they're not going to just
get progressively sicker as they get
older and you know lots of other reasons
are going to exist why they're going to
live
like we're gonna have self-driving cars
that pretty much eliminate you know road
accidents and so on so they're going to
want a lot of different things than what
they wanted when they thought they were
gonna live only slightly longer than
their parents they're gonna want very
different pension plans very different
life insurance health insurance very
differently inheritance arrangements and
these are huge big-ticket items right
they basically drive the global economy
suppose he makers and decision makers
around the world had damn well better be
ready for that shift in public
expectation of how long ago live right
yes now therefore is is absolutely
critical to estimate and to communicate
the estimate of how soon that shift in
public expectation is going to occur
which means how well what events have to
happen how much progress needs to happen
in order for that in order to cause that
shift now this is where I am terrified
because I think it's gonna happen really
soon I think it could easily happen in
the next three to five years and that
when it does happen it's gonna happen
incredibly suddenly it's the sequence of
events that I think is going to happen
step one we're going to have sufficient
progress in the laboratory or the clinic
that most of my scientific colleagues
are going to be willing to come out and
say more or less yeah Oh buddy grabbers
right although they're gonna say yeah
you know it's very excited about that no
I'm terrified and I'm gonna tell you
what I mean I know I have been but yeah
they're gonna they're gonna come and say
yeah it's only a matter of time before
we let this aging thing now what do you
think's gonna happen next you're a media
guy right yeah well I think it's gonna
happen but I want your I know whether
you think I'm right okay I think the
next things going to happen is that real
informers people like you people like
Oprah Winfrey are going to hear that
being said and written you know in the
media and they're gonna say oh shit
this is actually gonna happen and
they're gonna say so on-air and they're
going not only to say so what their
opinion is but they're gonna say what
they think people ought to do in
particularly they're gonna say well look
you know let's actually if we if if it's
only a matter of time if we're losing a
hundred and ten thousand people every
day worldwide to this phenomenon then we
do kind of have a bit of a moral
obligation to make it less time if we
can so my sense is that once that
happens the following day it's going to
become impossible to get elected and if
you have a manifesto commitment to you
know have a war on aging you know throw
proper money at this I mean I really
mean a proper war in aging not just like
the war on cancer was lots of money not
just really the research but also to
front-load all of the investment in
infrastructure and you know training and
medical personnel and so on okay and
everyone's gonna know it like the world
the public is going to make that switch
I just mentioned of expectation like at
once so it's going to be ridiculously
sudden once it happens and the first
step is going to be that shift in what
my colleagues in the Bo gerontology
community feel able to say on camera and
on stage now therefore the question is
what amount of progress is going to be
required for that to occur now here's
the thing there aren't very many of us
it's a small field the number of people
at the top of the field who actually
talked to the media quite a bit it's you
know a dozen maximum there's me this
David that you've had on the show
there's you know very few others and we
all know each other we're all good mates
right so we know exactly where our heads
Lee you know what they drivers are the
number one reason why my colleagues
don't already say what I say is funding
the fact that unlike me those people are
Relient for most of the money that
drives their research on peer-reviewed
government money government grants and
they just won't get them if it's
possible to accuse those accuse them of
saying irresponsible things for the
media things that get people's hopes up
unduly remember this hardly isn't
there's nowhere near enough - less than
10 percent of the necessary money to
fund research at the moment so the
committee's that decide who gets money
and who doesn't are always desperately
scouting around for reasons to say no
that can be justified and saying oh this
guy says they're responsible things for
the media a totally safe way to say no
right so anyway so this is this is the
problem this is why my colleagues have
to be really pretty curmudgeonly even
David David is probably the person out
of my colleagues who pushes the envelope
as much as possible out of people who
have regular faculty positions but you
know he's just written a book which I
see you have on yourself and called you
know why we age and why we don't have to
he could not have written that book with
that title five years ago and kept his
job Wow
so you know the question is how much has
to change and actually it's not very
much you know there's a balance here the
tension here between on the one hand not
saying things that can be characterized
as irresponsible but on the other hand
not saying thing that could be
characterized is simply untrue right so
the more progress was made in the
laboratory not even in the clinic just
with mice right in terms of actually you
know rejuvenating them making them live
longer with treatments that were given
to those mice when they were already in
middle age the more progress was made
you know the more impossible it's going
to be to carry on being pessimistic and
refusing to to make timeframe
predictions or anything like that so
there's a almost a forced pessimism
created by this time correct well I
think what you're saying makes a ton of
sense and that once it does get to the
point where this is undeniable there's
is peer-reviewed proven established
science and also implementable this is
something that can be at scale
distributed worldwide yeah things are
gonna get real weird so people are
already people are obviously still gonna
be saying it can't be done in humans you
know it can't really be done you know
until the cows come home you know just
in the same way I've had happen for any
other pioneering technology throughout
history but what matters is what the
center of gravity of expertly stated
expert opinion is it is a really really
polarizing subject I mean it is funny
how what you're saying brings so true
that academics and intellectuals have to
be cautious about talking about even
what is potentially possible even though
in private they probably are more than
aware that there's just a few steps to
go before this stuff gets implemented
and we see really catastrophic tacular
rather changes yeah I mean I'm not
saying that all of us absolutely agree
on 100% on everything in the science
certainly I would say that I'm slightly
on the optimistic end of the spectrum of
expert opinion but yeah my colleagues
are not all that far behind me in that
in terms of what they would say the time
frames are what you're saying in terms
of people discussing it the media makes
absolute sense to me that as soon as
that that Pandora's Box gets opened then
people are going to be looking to
establish clinics everywhere and it's it
could be very strange well even if even
if even if a lot of these things are not
yet available for clinical use even if
some of them are still at the beginning
of the clinical trial process and we're
still maybe 10 or 15 years away from the
real McCoy you know that will still be
enough to trigger this pandemonium and
that's why policymakers decision makers
in every way and but in government and
in key aspect of Industry need to I call
it anticipate the anticipation they need
to be have already thought through and
prepared for this change in public
expectation of how long they're going to
live so you think that this
one day will be a gigantic public issue
in terms of elected representatives that
they they're going to need to have some
sort of an anti-ageing policy that's
right and the switch from essentially
situation normal usual to this
completely new world will be
ridiculously sudden that will happen in
a week and do you think one of the
motivating factors would be the price of
healthcare that the argument would be
part of our issue with healthcare and
the an incredible amount of money that
needs to be spent on hospital as I
hospitalizing peaceful people and
treating them with diseases we could
eliminate that oh yeah that's a huge
part of it you know at the moment when
you talk to any you know any people any
elected representatives any way of a
very persuasion about the aging question
than the immediate knee jerk reaction is
always oh god we definitely don't want
to fix that how would we pay the
pensions alright because they obviously
they know if the economies feel a bit
right it's delayed yeah
and so that's what I think I think and
the fact if you're not going to be able
to get away with that kind of thinking
anymore it's going to have to be a case
of redesigning a large number of really
big parts of the economy from the ground
up well especially places like where you
live in England or use where you're from
rather in England where they have
socialized medicine the enormous cost of
that would be decreased radically we're
healthier it's it's got nothing to do
with private versus socialized medicine
in medicine yeah in the US and the UK
and everywhere else the overwhelming
majority of medical expenditure is on
the health problems of the elderly which
will go away now of course the medicine
that makes those problems go away is not
going to be free I mean to produce and
to deliver so but prevention is always
better than cure but that actually is
only a minority of the economic benefits
the real economic benefit comes from the
indirect cost first of all the fact that
the kids are the elderly are going to be
more productive because they're not
having to spend time looking after their
sick parents and you know relate things
like that but also the huge thing that
the elders themselves are still going
to be able bodied and therefore in a
position to you know continue to
contribute wealth to society right now
that doesn't necessarily mean anything
to do with the retirement age this comes
back to another aspect of the
interaction between emerging
technologies so of course we've got
automation coming I don't work on any
more but let's people do right will make
a huge progress in artificial
intelligence and most people even
conservative commentators say that most
of the jobs that exist today are going
to be gone 20 years from now said
machines will be doing things perfectly
well so you know we're going to happy
completely unable to continue this
system of a an economy based on full
employment you know last time this
happened with the Industrial Revolution
we got away with it by inventing an
entire new sector you know the service
sector that replaced all the jobs that
people didn't have anymore in
manufacturing and agriculture you know
it's not gonna happen this time it's not
gonna happen you know how many people do
you need in the entertainment industry
you know we've got you come on so you
know we're going to have a different
well of course people are already
thinking about that with things like you
know universal basic income yes which is
an extraordinarily blunt instrument it's
just a starting point but you know that
kind of thing is going to have to going
to happen I can totally imagine a
situation in which you know 30 40 years
from now work is something like national
service used to be yeah yeah well you
know well yeah when you're young and
insignificant you do a bit of a few
years of actual work and then yeah but
that means that the whole concept of
pensions it's ridiculous to think about
that so we've got a gas policymakers out
of that mindset and to get them to think
in more global terms about the health
benefits and the benefits the quality of
life of everybody and so on
it is funny that work or the concept of
work is sort of inexorably connected to
society to the point where you think you
have to work but you know meanwhile
people lived for hundreds of thousands
of years without even the concept of
that you know I got a place where you go
where they give you gold coins all right
yeah yeah I mean of course you do have
to have something
something something that fulfills coming
to do that you find fulfilling that's
the argument for universal basic income
right the argument against it is human
nature that people need to be motivated
and they need something to sort of guide
them towards excellence yeah my take is
the other thing that needs a better
education which of course is something
that we could spend the money on that we
save from not having to yeah my glass
half full guy well I don't know anybody
well educated who gets bored you know
yeah I agree with you or anybody who's
been exposed to interesting things right
there are so many things in this world I
mean if I had I would love to live five
different lives concurrently I would
love to I would I would I would love to
it I don't have to be concurrent that
questions you just dive into they like I
would love to live different lives
because there's so many different things
that I would have loved to pursue well
you can't let currently can one brain
but let's try to make you live them
sequentially instead yeah well seeking
which will be fun I'm it would be really
interesting to take up a whole new
career at 70 you know and so there's
three to five-year timeline what what
makes you think that three to five years
from now is when all this stuff will
take place well of course it's
subjective it's based on aggregating a
whole bunch of different areas of
research but of course I'm fairly
well-informed about where is that
currently isn't how rapidly it's moving
in a broke with variety of different
areas I'm so just you know just I'm
putting all that together in my head and
I'm saying how soon are we going to be
able to take mice that normally live
let's say two and a half years and do
nothing whatsoever to them until they
are one-half and get them to an average
live to four instead of two and a half
right now if you can and of course those
extra years would be healthy years
because we would be rejuvenating the
mice right so I believe that that would
be sufficient any of it that's actually
a little bit conservative I think a less
dramatic breakthrough than that might be
enough to switch most of my colleagues
over that get them over the fence but I
think that would definitely be enough
and I think that that is close what was
the research done with mice with
myostatin inhibitors did not increase
lifespan as well
yeah sure I mean a lot of things have
extended extended lifespan a fair bit
but what we have at the moment is not
all the components of what I just said
if you do something genetic to mice or
if you do it you know to them throughout
their lives then we can already get that
year year and a half out of mice
certainly yeah okay but not if you start
at 18 months if you've got 18 months the
best we can do it it may be four months
so that's the difference you've got to
be able to start late and get the big
expansion and you're not gonna get that
without bona fide origination hmm so
that's not gonna come by way of genetics
well even if it did come by web kinetics
it wouldn't matter it wouldn't persuade
my colleague or me that we were on the
brink of doing it for humans who have
the misfortune of being already alive
hmm so the rejuvenation is going to come
through some sort of biologics well yes
through the kinds of things were working
on that I mentioned earlier
stem cells gene therapy to do various
thing to introduce for example bacterial
enzymes that can break down waste
product
sima lytic that I talked about
pharmaceuticals to do other things um
what about the use of CRISPR sure what
crispies are very very important part of
this so can you please explain what
CRISPR means and people don't know what
we're talking about sure yes so CRISPR
is a technology that was first developed
about eight years ago now and it is the
exploitation of a bacterial mechanism
that allows bacteria to defend
themselves against viruses essentially
how it works is that it allows us to
change the sequence of our genome in a
particular cell in a very specific way
it's often called gene editing and there
are other technologies for gene editing
that already existed before Chris but a
very laborious very expensive and very
clunky this is far far cheaper and
easier to use
so what that does is it allows us for
example to inactive energy or for that
matter to change the sequence of a gene
from a mutant form into a normal
form so that it works when it was
previously not working now doing that in
the laboratory in a petri dish is fair
enough the question is can we do it in
the body and initially no initially this
technology was too error-prone it was
primed to do what what George Church has
called genetic vandalism and make have
what's called off-target effects in
other words basically do other changes
to the genome elsewhere that you didn't
want but of course people have known
listen people have been working really
hard to improve the technology and it's
getting to the point now where it's
possible to actually use it on humans
maybe you know it's getting it's getting
that now you can't do everything with
CRISPR one thing you definitely can't do
with CRISPR is insert new genes into the
genome and that's something we really
need to be able to do but actually one
of our big projects is a kind of
two-step thing where we use CRISPR to
make a small change to the genome that
allows us to insert large genes where we
couldn't previously so yeah so the
CRISPR is huge and it's used not only in
aging research but across the whole
board of biomedical work that's they
have done some work in China apparently
on live human being so this was very
controversial what happened was that a
group in China used CRISPR to alter the
DNA of embryos that were going to be
used for IVF in vitro fertilization and
the change that was made was itself
quite a curious one essentially what
they did was they tried to change a gene
called ccr5 into a mutant form that
doesn't work but that in its inactive
form protects the body from infection by
HIV this is something that was
discovered a long time ago and maybe 1%
of people have this genotype and so this
was introduced
unfortunately first of all it probably
wasn't done very well but also well what
people who looked at the
that the process and it probably didn't
they probably didn't make the correct
modification but also it's not clear
whether doing it for someone lifelong is
actually a good thing because as I say
it's an inactivation of a gene that must
exist for a reason or it wouldn't exist
at all right but didn't it also have a
side effect of increased intelligence
that is complete speculation is it yes
why what would cause them to speculate
that I people speculate all the time
that's just like clickbait stuff that
gets people excited about it yeah okay
but yes so anyway the other thing was
that it's not obvious why it's even
worthwhile to make an embryo genetically
resistant to HIV first of all they don't
have HIV yet in the first place and they
may never get it and secondly we've got
drugs that work pretty well to control
HIV antiretroviral tears yeah so I'm so
it's not obvious why this was a sensible
thing to do in the first place however
it certainly got a whole bunch of debate
going so yeah well when I hear about
something like that I always assume
first of all I mean just American
prejudiced you assume that it's in China
they're doing something crazy right and
you also assume that if they're telling
you about someone who's been altered
that means that they've probably doing
this for a decade or since Christopher
was initiative initiated eight years ago
you never know yeah you never know it's
just it's interesting to me and I don't
want them to do it on people but when
they do do it on people I'm fascinated
you know it's I don't you know well
that's right I mean that's the attitude
that I have and a lot of people have to
medical tourism in general yes that the
you know these are not adequately
regulated treatments and they are
certainly not adequately characterized
in other words the people who kept the
treatments people who pay for them
rather than people who have been chosen
to be in a standardized group of any
kind and there tends to be very still
follow-up but still it's better than
nothing in the sense that you know some
information exists about the efficacy
and safety of these treatments as a
result the more that exists the better
the more the people who are
administering these fields can be
induced
to reveal their data the better hey even
if it's anonymized but you know a some
scientists quite a lot of scientists
take a much stronger view that you know
we just should oppose all of this period
and we should just say you know everyone
who indulges who gives treatments to
people in offshore places should be shut
down as much best we can and should be
demonized I don't really think that's
true I think there's a halfway house
personally I've had my family my mother
has gone to Panama okay twice and she
was on the verge of a knee replacement
and now she walks without pain yeah I
bet you actually went to nil really yes
yeah yeah yeah I mean there are a lot of
people who have very good story that
I've nailed group and I of course the
thing if you don't know unless someone
has a really bad story whether things
are going wrong so I I mean I don't know
whether Neil release is numbers that the
total number of patients per year that
he treats so we don't know if it hit
right yeah I don't know I just do know
that I have speaking spoken to several
fighters from the UFC that have gone
down there and again my mother was I
mean she didn't want to get a knee
replacement so when I sent her down
there and it took she's times 52 she's
73 so it took her somewhere around 6 to
8 months before she started feeling
anything she was really worried that it
wasn't gonna work but then in eight
months in just the pain just went away
and it's continued to get better and
then I sent her down a second time and
I'm gonna keep sending her down there
it's just it's at a pretty profound
effect was fascinating to me is they do
three days of intravenous therapy and
the intravenous therapy has I don't know
if it's just my imagination but she
looks younger like she looks she looks
more vibrant you know like when I saw
her she came to my house for Christmas I
she looked better she looked a year
younger than she did the last time I saw
her
yeah I mean um you know this is what we
would hope that stem-cell therapy
yes but I remind you of what I said
about that original Parkinson's try
from more than 25 years right for 15
years really didn't know that was the
one that was affair right exactly so
only a few people benefited the people
who did benefit benefit benefit enormous
leap but huge numbers of people had no
benefit yes know that it's the kind of
stage they were in for a lot of stem
cell therapies right now Parkinson's
disease is a kind of outlier in the
sense that the desired function of the
stem cell is really well understood so
what kind of stem cells to introduce
into the body and where to introduce
them is you know not in doubt most them
self therapies are not that far along so
every time anyone gets treated right now
it's still an experiment and that's okay
up to a point but it doesn't mean that
we're all learning curve and it's vital
to have the people like Neil who are
administering the therapy to quite a lot
of people to actually not just you know
live off the stories of high-profile
people who get good benefits and talk
them up but actually two goalies the day
release oh got the full data on
instigated you know including any
negative stuff and including follow up
that's the key thing
yeah so many therapies in regenerative
medicine in general have the potential
to be beneficial over the first you know
a few months to a year or whatever and
then to start having side effects that
those detrimental what have you heard
that are no side effects oh well of
course the biggest thing that we always
have to worry about is cancer because
and this is true for a whole bunch of
things you know telomerase activators
and so on
the thing is that aging can in some
senses be characterized as a trade-off
between cancer and everything else in
other words a huge amount of what goes
wrong with the body late in life is a
result of a kind of dialing down of
regenerative functions that we actually
do naturally have in the body but which
are not as active in older people if
they are in
and so of course we have to ask why are
they less active and a lot of biologists
including myself believe that a huge
part of part of that is adaptive in
other words it is kind of the body
recognizing that varies as time goes on
a progressively higher number of cells
in the body that are almost cancerous
and that have to be kind of kept in
check in her not to become properly
cancerous because of course cancer is
the result of the gradual accumulation
of mutations and so on in the cells
right and so yes I'm every time that you
are improving regenerative capacity
whether of the cells that you put in or
more importantly of the cells that are
nearby the cells you put in you are
potentially taking the risk of hastening
the onset of actual cancer what is your
opinion on the benefits of fasting in
that regard okay fasting is that okay
well let me first of all talk about
fasting in relation to cancer that's
important people have certainly found
that it's a good thing to do which is
somewhat counterintuitive because in the
later stages of cancers of course
cachexia you know a lot of loss of
muscle and so on but earlier on it seems
that we can set things down I mean
cancers are greedy metabolically you
know they consume a lot of energy so if
you're putting a lot putting if you have
minimizing how many calories you put in
then you have a chance of slowing the
cancer down so the therapies may have a
better chance that certainly been found
let me talk about fasting more generally
that so for sure
in I mean it's been known for nearly a
hundred years that if you give mice or
rats less food than they were likes and
they live longer than they otherwise do
and this is certainly the most
reproducible and best study phenomena in
the whole of biology of aging still
there are mysteries about how it works
but a lot of stuff has been found out
and many of my colleagues including
David I've made their careers by making
progress in but making discovering
insights in that area
there are a lot of that is that we now
have something that people have always
recognized to be rather important namely
drugs that trick the body into thinking
it's fasting when it isn't yeah they
called calorie restriction memetics
and you know that's good that's that's
also worthwhile think because of course
people like eating and so um you know it
would be useful then there are
variations on the themes a guy from
close to hairline insulted longest for
us sake in photo longer has has been
really the pioneer of intermittent
fasting which is basically properly
starting a hundred percent but only for
two days a week or something like that
you know different people have tried
different schedules and all of these
things are pretty interesting in terms
of being good for your health but in
terms of increasing your longevity by
thirty or forty percent the way they're
doing mice and rats no way it turns out
and this is a prediction of evolutionary
theory but it's also been found
absolutely clearly in data that
different species react differently to
to starvation - it's a factor - fasting
in particular that longer live species
get less benefit from fasting than
shorter live species so if you do it
just right in nematode worms that
normally live like three weeks then you
can multiply their lifespan by a factor
of five or more right you sure if I
can't do that with a mouse however you
do it you can get up to maybe fifty
percent maybe sixty percent if you
really really work at it some of the
person you might be able to eke out a
year or two with yeah that's right with
with dogs that's been tried you get
maybe ten percent with monkey if you get
a few percent if you're lucky that's a
bit controversial right now you know
yeah that's why is it a bit
controversial because there were two
studies done really long expensive
studies obviously cos monkeys live a
long time and they got different results
and so the question is why they get
results if you look closely exactly how
the experiments were done that it's
pretty easy to see that they've got
different results because of different
methodologies slightly different
methodologies and that the real answer
is somewhere between the two
so yeah hmm and with dogs you said you
get 10% about that yeah this with
Labradors that live
eleven year oh but isn't that normal
that's like website I'm saying if they
got about another year Oh they've got to
understand that's done so fasting with
human beings you think is it's
interesting it's something but it's not
gonna mimic these biologics and what
what you believe is on that rise right I
mean I'm not against it at all first of
all as I say it is generally good for
health you know you definitely see
people getting sick less you know
regular sickness like many infections
and so on people seem to stay healthier
for a bit for a bit longer but in terms
of really pushing out the boundaries of
these age-related progressive chronic
conditions
you know it's maybe a Oh - there's a few
other factors in that are taken into
consideration when people talk about
longevity and health and those are
community enjoyment friends loved ones
satisfaction with what you do for a
living how do you take those into
consideration and what do you think is
going on with those yeah these things
are definitely big so all of these
things only go further than that it
extends to like you know meditation and
yes yoga and so on everything that
relates to stress is very important in
aging it's you know it's it's reasonably
well understood that when you're in a
stressed-out state you create you
synthesize elevated amounts of certain
hormones that interact throughout the
body and in various ways accelerate the
accumulation of these various types of
damage I was talking about earlier um so
it's no surprise that there's a
mind-body relationship there and in fact
if we so people often study centenarians
people who live an exceptionally long
time right and why do they look
obviously because they want to find out
what the tricks are unfortunately it's
quite frustrating because there's not a
lot in common you know some centenarians
a little bit overweight so I'm sitting
there in smoke you know it's it's it's
not easy to actually figure out what
they're got in common but there's one
thing that almost all centenarians have
in common which is nothing bothered
it's not necessarily that they have had
particularly stress-free lives the thing
is that when they encounter a stressful
situation they cope with it really well
and you know so you know the hormone
level feather thing you don't get
elevated interesting so the cortisol
doesn't rise adrenaline doesn't spike
they don't freak out slightly for spike
for Mom or yes they don't lose sleep
they can handle it that's interesting
that's so it really boils down to the
effect that's going on inside the mind
in the body yeah that's how it the
body's reacting to the stress do you
meditate yourself no no I'm just show
anyway well you're also satisfied well I
certainly can say yeah yeah so you don't
feel the need yeah at a physical level I
have a very stressful life I spend my
life running around airports and so on
but at mental level macho do you take
any dude are you doing any exercise do
you take supplements hopefully holding
my way through a poet is my exercise
hauling your way through airports how
often you flying ten percent of the time
do you just take one of them berries you
have to carry rather than a roller bad
idea do you remember us yep for extra
work or you know for extra work no it's
just because I can move faster that way
without okay but yeah I mean certainly
the fact that I've actually I've
actually got some weight on my shoulders
yeah probably good in itself yeah I
started carrying a backpack instead of a
roller bag I've just it's just easy to
move then hold it on something and
dragging it behind me and I found that
there's something I have a bag that I
could stick a laptop in and I can stick
all my clothes and it's just a larger
bag yeah I cry too generally well I mean
like well I'm doing a date for it like
today I only carry my laptop back then
but it's a really cavernous one so it's
pretty heavy it's got everything in it
like you know that I need for a day or
could need and then when I'm traveling a
longer trip I just have one other bag of
sports back you know that I'm carrying
is there anything that you think you
should be doing that you're not doing
that you maybe you would like to plan
for in the future
um it's hard to say because I mean I do
have a lot of freedom about exactly how
I spend any particular day
I mean it's more a case of what I would
be doing if I didn't have to do the
things I'm doing now which he's
obviously doing all this advocacy and
yeah have you ever used a sensory
deprivation tank no no I'd like you to
use that I'd like to hear your feedback
I have one here what would you like I
just well you know because it was very
relaxing I'm relaxed already you say
getting there say you know what it is
right
it's it's beautiful feels amazing yeah
no I'm into sensory deprivation in
general you know when I'm asleep I I
don't like to have any kind of noise or
light you know one of my Bane's of
staying in hotels which don't have
proper blackout curtains and you know I
typically when I'm in a hotel room I
unplug the refrigerator the noise yeah
so you're you basically got it dialed in
well I'm optimistic because you're
optimistic when you tell me three to
five years from now we're possibly
looking at some sort of a breakthrough
where things start moving into the
public eye where people are really
taking a consideration like this is this
is real technology that you should we
should all start implementing on our
particularly on people that are older
and ailing well right I mean at the
moment even though there are some things
in clinical trials we always have to
remember that the most challenging areas
are still at an early stage so that's
why I make and not only do they have to
individually guess you know it's all the
way through your clinical trial so
they're safe but also they have to be
combined you know each of these things
individually can be applied to a small
subset of the population that happen to
have you know early onset diseases
arising from may be congenital
acceleration of one particular type of
damage right but then to work to be
useful for the people who don't have any
congenital problems who are aging a
normal rate we've got to actually
combine them all and of course that's
going to throw up on unanticipated
interactions so that's why I put this
time for him as far out of 17 years and
even then with only fifth
that probability right but the
anticipation is the thing that's where
the shit's gonna really hit the fact you
know there's gonna be an enormous
turbulence in society arising from the
knowledge that this is coming I for one
am very excited about living to be 500 I
think I can get a lot of shit done I
learned about myself you know people I
think it's I think it's I I think it
makes no sense to think about what one's
gonna be doing in the distant future
yeah people was one time I was on stage
about I guess a five or six years ago
and somebody from the audience for about
the thousandth time asked me um you know
how long do you want to live
I just lost it's like how questions just
one more time to other okay I've got a
question for you I said I said right
what time do you want to go to the
toilet next Sunday I said yeah you
haven't the face idea why I asked you
that question D but it's exactly the
same kind of question yes you know you
may have an opinion about what time you
expect to go to the toilet next time
they because of habit but having an
opinion about what time you want to go
to the toilet is completely crazy so
you're going to have better information
on the topic near at the time and you're
going to be able to act on that
information it's exactly the same and
also the idea of how long you want to
live is going to be irrelevant if they
can repair disease and fix all these
issues it's just going to be the quality
of life professionally I mean having an
idea of how long you want to live even
stating that the quality of life is
going to be like a young adult
physically and mentally you know it's
crazy to have an opinion because it's
going to be determined by other stuff
yes
well I'm fascinated by the future in
every aspect technologically with
artificial intelligence with automation
just the just the the way society is
shifting I mean I'm a very optimistic
person in that regard and I think even
the problems some of the problems that
we have socially I think those are just
a
a result of this shift towards a more
aware more conscious society I'm very
optimistic I think all those things are
good so I think that the extending
lifespan and getting to see these real
exponential changes in our culture and
in our society and just our way of life
I'm very excited about it I think it's I
think it's one of the most intriguing
things about being a person is to see
how things have shifted I've been
reading a lot of books lately about
Native Americans and things how they
shifted from the early 1800s to the you
know 21st century the early 21st century
200 years later things are impossibly
different unimaginably different at the
time if you could talk to them about
what life was like 200 years ago it'd be
fairly similar 1620 to 1820 not a lot of
difference right you know but 1822 20 20
good lord what is 2220 going to be like
I mean I I just think that we are at the
cusp of one of the most spectacular
errors in human history things are
changing so rapidly and so amazingly
well of course the thing that one has to
recognize is that we have no particular
reason to suppose that they will ever
flared out yes so you cannot really call
this one of the cusps it's just you know
we're in an exponential fall area and we
happen to be noticing it more are you
since you started off as a coder I'm
gonna wrap this up soon but I'm gonna
leave you with this because I'm really
fascinated by artificial intelligence
are you worried at all about artificial
intelligence do you you like here the
Elon Musk's and the Sam Harris's of the
world that are like sounding the alarm
like hey don't don't hit that switch
don't turn this on I think it's a
legitimate question whether the progress
that we're making might lead to
development perhaps accidental
development of technology that is so
autonomous
that it gets out of our control however
I do think it's very unlikely I think
that the ways in which we have succeeded
in making the progress that we have made
so far in over the past decade
especially relies enormous Leon
human-computer interaction in other
words the the the machines get their
information from us and from the world
without which they can't make progress
and I don't see that changing really a
time soon I do still you know pay some
attention to the progress of AI well my
other good friends a guy that I knew
from way back at my Cambridge days is
the guy who runs deep mind which is one
of the most high-profile they are
companies and you know I'm definitely
you know excited about what's happening
but no I'm not particularly apprehensive
however I do think that it's better to
be safe than sorry and therefore that
what what's being done to look at the
possibilities all things getting out of
control or indeed of things just being
misused by humans is you know is a very
legitimate and valuable area of work
well Aubrey the next time I see you if
it's five years from now I hope you look
younger I hope the world has changed and
everything's groovy and I appreciate you
and I appreciate everything you're doing
well thank you so much please tell
people if they're more interested in
finding out about what you're doing what
is the website of your organization yep
that's especially for elephant infinite
member efficient lrj all right thank you
thank you very much thank you bye
everybody
[Music]
what's wrong